URL: https://blogs.loc.gov/picturethis/2026/04/the-classic-american-diner/

Although diners may not be as ubiquitous as they once were, they are a distinctive part of American food culture, and they can still be found dotting the landscape. Images of these establishments from the Library of Congress collections offer a reminder of some of their common characteristics, and may also bring a wave of nostalgia.
Not all diners look like train cars, but many do because they were fabricated to look that way by the companies that mass-produced them in the 20th century. When ordered, they conveniently fit into actual rail cars for transportation and delivery. This diner in Columbus, Georgia, advertises American and Korean food and features a corrugated metal surface:
The photograph below of the Country Girl Diner in Vermont was taken less than a decade ago. The restaurant features that same distinctive silvery surface and a welcoming entrance, possibly designed to keep the chill out on cold winter days.
Some photographs give a glimpse of a diner’s menu. In this photograph taken in Maryland during the summer of 1940, we see hot dogs on offer for 5 cents and a “platter” for 25 cents.
This exterior shot of a New York City diner from 1959 shows the establishment asking 75 cents for “ham ‘n’ eggs” with a side of potatoes and buttered toast, alongside other breakfast and lunch staples.
Some images include clues about the people who were likely to frequent a given diner. The caption for this photo from 1940 indicates truck drivers formed an important part of this New York diner’s customer base:
The photo below appears to show a row of truck drivers sitting at a Maryland diner counter. Many roadside diners were open 24 hours a day to accommodate customers who worked long hours. The coffee seemed to be flowing in this scene.
Photos that were made within the past ten years demonstrate that diners are not just a thing of the past, although they do often make a nod to mid twentieth-century design. This photograph shows a diner in eastern Tennessee with a Ford Fairlane from the era parked in front.
The 5 & Diner in Phoenix serves up a 1950s-era atmosphere, as evident in this photograph of server Tara Keogh holding a vanilla ice cream soda on a tray, surrounded by checkerboard floors and red accents.
When was the last time you found yourself in a diner? It’s been a while for me, but these images may inspire me to seek one out this weekend.
Learn More:
- Browse additional diner-related photographs from the Library of Congress collections.
- Explore the Carol M. Highsmith Archive, which includes a few images from this blog post and features photographs documenting the United States from 1980 to the present.