URL: https://e.foundation/e-os/

/e/OS is a complete, fully “deGoogled”, mobile ecosystem
/e/OS is an open-source mobile operating system paired with carefully selected applications. They form a privacy-enabled internal system for your smartphone. And it’s not just claims: open-source means auditable privacy. /e/OS has received academic recognition from researchers at the University of Edinburgh and Trinity College of Dublin.
We could have just focused on an OS, but apps and online services are crucial components of our everyday experience, too.
These online services, including our search engine, email platform, cloud storage and other online tools, create a unique privacy enhanced environment.
/e/OS key features
A "deGoogled" OS
/e/OS is a “deGoogled” version of Android OS. It has an open-source Android OS core, with no Google apps or Google services accessing your personal data.
- Google default search engine has been removed from the OS everywhere and replaced with our new ethical search engine: Murena Find
- Google Services have been replaced by microG
- Connectivity checks do not use Google servers
- We do not use Google’s Network Time Protocol servers
- We do not use Google’s Domain Name System servers
- Geolocation uses BeaconDB Location Services in addition to GPS
Compatible with Android apps
/e/OS is compatible with all your favorite Android apps, because keeping your data private shouldn’t mean forgoing your digital experience.
Within /e/OS you’ll find a set of carefully selected default apps to cover your most common needs, personal and professional: get your emails, plan your week ahead, chat with your friends and coworkers, browse the web, check the weather, check your itinerary for your next meeting…
All the apps are based on open source bricks. We improve their design and experience to make them look stellar and easy to use daily.
For everything else, head to our App Lounge!
Apps with rated privacy
Applications available in our Installer include open source apps that you can get from Fdroid, as well as free Android apps that you would find in your usual repository.
In a blink of an eye, /e/OS can decipher the app code for you: you can see which and how many trackers are in the app. It also documents the number of permissions the app requires to operate. With an easy to read scoring, you can see which apps are safe and which ones should be avoided.
Escape the digital surveillance
Not only /e/OS informs you about trackers found in apps but you will be able to choose whether you accept or not to stay tracked in the Advanced Privacy widget, along with other cool features such as hiding your IP address or geolocation when you feel like it.
This feature and our ad blocker enabled by default in the web browser will also let you enjoy a digital life with very few or no ads in applications and on the web.
One account for your privacy
Operated by Murena, your Murena Workspace account @murena.io is at the centre of the ecosystem, allowing you to store, back up and retrieve your data safely on remote servers.
It also allows you to work and collaborate with your office documents online. The Murena Workspace account comes with 1GB of free storage, a free email address and Murena Vault: an end-to-end encrypted directory for ultimate protection of your documents. A great replacement to Office365.
For advanced users, we also offer options to self-host.
Parental Control
/e/OS has its own parental control functionality that keeps children away from non-appropriate web contents and apps, depending on their age.
It also offers an option to select apps that cannot be installed, and customizable screen-time limit. Parents now also have an option to locate their child’s smartphone using /e/OS’ Find my device feature.
One application to rule them all
/e/OS comes with Account Manager. This application allows you to add your account(s) from any provider and sync your data on your
/e/OS device.
This way you can check your new emails in real time, see when is your next meeting, call your new neighbour whose number you had saved on another device and update your tasks in real time…
And all this while respecting your privacy: your data is stored locally on your device and is not shared with any third party servers except of course as required by Murena Workspace, Google, Yahoo or any other provider for authentication and synchronization purpose.
How to get /e/OS?
Want to give /e/OS a try?
We have different options for you, whether you’re a hands-on user or prefer a turn key solution.
Buy a Murena smartphone with /e/OS
You want a smartphone with /e/OS out of the box?
Look no further and browse among our selection of deGoogled Android smartphones.
Use our /e/OS Installer
The /e/OS Installer is a web application which helps users install /e/OS on supported devices in just a few clicks! It works with browsers supporting WebUSB.
Download /e/OS
If the Easy Installer doesn’t support your device yet, and you are a more experienced user, download and install /e/OS directly from our Gitlab environment.
You’ll find detailed instructions for each supported device and all the tools you need to get /e/ running in a matter of minutes.
In Need Of Help?
Our User Documentation
To help you get started with /e/OS or your Murena Workspace account, you will find troubleshooting guides, and How To’s about many topics like setting up your mail account or migrating your data.
Our Community Forum
Our Community Forum is the best place to learn more about the project, upcoming features, get user help or just post your impressions.
Dedicated Chat Room
Prefer messaging? Developers and expert users are also available to offer technical support by chat via a dedicated Telegram channel.
For Developers
If you are a developer and would like to get direct access to our resources, report a bug or contribute?
Our Accessibility Documentation
To help you make your /e/OS devices accessible, you will find guides to enable caption, change your display and set many other accessibility features.
Professional Services
We can offer professional services for your business!