URL: https://github.github.com/gh-stack/

Stacked PRs, Native in GitHub
Arrange pull requests in an ordered stack and merge them all in one click. Each PR represents one focused layer of your change, reviewed independently and landed together.
gh stack
CLI.Stacked PRs, Native in GitHub
Arrange pull requests in an ordered stack and merge them all in one click. Each PR represents one focused layer of your change, reviewed independently and landed together.
Simplified Stack Management
Navigate between PRs in your stack from the GitHub UI, check the status of every layer at a glance, and trigger a cascading rebase across the entire stack with one click.
Powerful CLI
The gh stack
CLI makes it easy to create stacks, perform cascading rebases, push branches and create PRs, and navigate between layers — all from your terminal.
AI Agent Integration
Run npx skills add github/gh-stack
to teach your AI coding agents how to work with stacks. Break up a large diff into a stack or develop with stacks from the start.
Large pull requests are hard to review, slow to merge, and prone to conflicts. Reviewers lose context, feedback quality drops, and the whole team slows down. Stacked PRs solve this by breaking big changes into a chain of small, focused pull requests that build on each other — each one independently reviewable.
A stack is a series of pull requests in the same repository where each PR targets the branch of the PR below it, forming an ordered chain that ultimately lands on your main branch.
GitHub understands stacks end-to-end: the pull request UI shows a stack map so reviewers can navigate between layers, branch protection rules are enforced against the final target branch (not just the direct base), and CI runs for every PR in the stack as if they were targeting the final branch.
The gh stack
CLI handles the local workflow: creating branches, managing rebases, pushing to GitHub, and creating PRs with the correct base branches. On GitHub, the PR UI gives reviewers the context they need — a stack map for navigation, focused diffs for each layer, and proper rules enforcement.
When you’re ready to merge, you can merge all or a part of the stack. Each PR can be merged directly or through the merge queue. After a merge, the remaining PRs in the stack are automatically rebased so the lowest unmerged PR targets the base branch.
Ready to dive in? Start with the Quick Start guide or read the full overview.