URL: https://newsroom.arm.com/blog/introducing-arm-agi-cpu

Announcing Arm AGI CPU: The silicon foundation for the agentic AI cloud era
Today, Arm is announcing the Arm AGI CPU, a new class of production-ready silicon built on the Arm Neoverse platform and designed to power the next generation of AI infrastructure.
For the first time in our more than 35-year history, Arm is delivering its own silicon products – extending the Arm Neoverse platform beyond IP and Arm Compute Subsystems (CSS) to give customers greater choice in how they deploy Arm compute – from building custom silicon to integrating platform-level solutions or deploying Arm-designed processors. It reflects both the rapid evolution of AI infrastructure and growing demand from the ecosystem for production-ready Arm platforms that can be deployed at pace and scale.
The rise of the agentic AI infrastructure
AI systems are increasingly operating continuously at global scale. Historically, the human was the bottleneck in computing – the pace at which people could interact with systems defined how quickly work could move through them. In the era of agentic AI, that constraint disappears as software agents coordinate tasks, interact with multiple models and make decisions in real time.
As AI systems run continuously and workloads grow in complexity, the CPU becomes the pacing element of modern infrastructure – responsible for keeping distributed AI systems operating efficiently at scale. In a modern-day AI data center, the CPU manages thousands of distributed tasks – orchestrating accelerators, managing memory and storage, scheduling workloads and moving data across systems – and now, with agentic AI, coordinating fan-out across large numbers of agents.
This shift places new demands on the CPU and that requires an evolution of the processor.
Arm Neoverse already underpins many of today’s leading hyperscale and AI platforms, including AWS Graviton, Google Axion, Microsoft Azure Cobalt and NVIDIA Vera. As AI infrastructure scales globally, partners across the ecosystem are asking Arm to do more. The Arm AGI CPU was created to address this shift.
Arm AGI CPU: Built for rack-scale agentic efficiency
Agentic AI workloads demand sustained performance at massive scale. The Arm AGI CPU is designed to deliver high per-task performance at sustained load across thousands of cores in parallel – all within the power and cooling limits of modern data centers.
Every element of the Arm AGI CPU – from operating frequency to memory and I/O architecture – has been designed to support massively parallel, high-performance agentic workloads in a densely populated rack deployment.
Arm’s reference server configuration is a 1OU, 2-node design – packing in two chips with dedicated memory and I/O for a total of 272 cores per blade. These blades are designed to fully populate a standard air-cooled 36kW rack – 30 blades delivering a total of 8160 cores. Arm has additionally partnered with Supermicro on a liquid-cooled 200kW design capable of housing 336 Arm AGI CPUs for over 45,000 cores.
In this configuration, the Arm AGI CPU is capable of delivering more than 2x the performance per rack compared to the latest x86 systems*, achieved through the fundamental advantages of the Arm architecture and careful matching of system resources to compute:
- Arm AGI CPU’s class-leading memory bandwidth means more effective threads of execution per rack; x86 CPUs degrade as cores contend under sustained load.
- High performance, efficient, single-threaded Arm Neoverse V3 CPU cores outperform legacy architectures; every Arm thread does more work.
- More usable threads and more work-per-thread compounds to massive performance gains per rack.
Early momentum across the AI ecosystem
The Arm AGI CPU is already seeing strong commercial momentum with partners at the forefront of scaling agentic AI infrastructure. Planned deployments span accelerator management, agentic orchestration and the densification of services, applications and tools needed for agentic task scale-out — as well as increased networking and data plane compute to support the AI data center.
Meta is our lead partner and customer, co-developing the Arm AGI CPU to optimize gigawatt-scale infrastructure for its Meta family of apps and to work alongside Meta’s own custom MTIA accelerators. Other launch partners include Cerebras, Cloudflare, F5, OpenAI, Positron, Rebellions, SAP, and SK Telecom – each working with Arm on the deployment of the Arm AGI CPU to accelerate AI-driven services across cloud, networking and enterprise environments. Commercial systems are now available for order from ASRockRack, Lenovo and Supermicro.
To accelerate adoption further, Arm is introducing the Arm AGI CPU 1OU Dual Node Reference Server, an Open Compute Project (OCP) DC-MHS standard form factor server. Arm plans to contribute this reference server design and supporting firmware, along with further contributions including system architecture specifications, debug frameworks and diagnostic and verification tooling applicable to all Arm-based systems. Further details will come at the upcoming OCP EMEA Summit.
A new chapter for Arm infrastructure
The launch of Arm AGI CPU represents a new chapter in Arm’s data center journey and continued leadership in computing innovation. As AI reshapes the industry, Arm remains committed to enabling progress across the ecosystem – meeting customers where they are, from hyperscale cloud providers to AI startups.
The Arm AGI CPU is the first offering of Arm’s new data center silicon product line and is available to order now. Follow-on products are committed, targeting best-in-class performance, scale and efficiency. This continues in parallel with the Arm Neoverse CSS product roadmap so that all Arm data center customers move forward together on platform architecture and software compatibility.
Entering this new chapter, our mission remains unchanged: to provide the compute foundation that enables innovation across industries. And the ecosystem is fully behind us: More than 50 leading companies across hyperscale, cloud, silicon, memory, networking, software, system design and manufacturing are supporting the expansion of the Arm compute platform into silicon. With Arm AGI CPU, we are not only defining the architecture of the AI-native data center, we are building it.
Hear more from our Arm AGI CPU deployment partners:
Cerebras
“At Cerebras we build AI infrastructure designed for ultra-fast, large-scale inference, and as this becomes the dominant workload in AI, composable, high-performance systems matter more than ever – these systems need purpose-built AI acceleration alongside efficient, scalable CPUs orchestrating data movement, networking, and coordination at scale. Extending the Arm compute platform into AGI-class infrastructure is a positive step for the ecosystem and for customers deploying AI at global scale.” – Andrew Feldman, CEO, Cerebras
Cloudflare
“To continue our mission of helping build a better Internet, Cloudflare needs infrastructure that scales efficiently across our global network. The Arm AGI CPU provides high-performance, energy-efficient compute designed for the next generation of workloads.” – Stephanie Cohen, Chief Strategy Officer, Cloudflare
Meta
“Delivering AI experiences at global scale demands a robust and adaptable portfolio of custom silicon solutions, purpose-built to accelerate AI workloads and optimize performance across Meta’s platforms. We worked alongside Arm to develop the Arm AGI CPU to deploy an efficient compute platform that significantly improves our data center performance density and supports a multi-generation roadmap for our evolving AI systems.” – Santosh Janardhan, Head of Infrastructure, Meta
OpenAI
“OpenAI runs AI systems at massive scale. Hundreds of millions use ChatGPT every day, businesses build on our API, and developers rely on tools like Codex. The Arm AGI CPU will play an important role in our infrastructure as we scale, strengthening the orchestration layer that coordinates large scale AI workloads and improving efficiency, performance, and bandwidth across the system.” – Sachin Katti, Head of Industrial Compute at OpenAI
Positron
“At Positron, we are focused on purpose-built inference accelerators that delivers breakthrough token generation efficiency using commodity memory. Arm has consistently delivered the industry’s most power-efficient compute platforms, which makes the Arm AGI CPU a natural foundation for next-generation AI infrastructure. By combining Positron’s inference acceleration technology with the energy-efficient Arm AGI CPU platform, we see a powerful opportunity to help data center operators deploy frontier AI models at scale with greater performance per watt and per dollar.” – Mitesh Agrawal, CEO, Positron AI
Rebellions
“High-performance AI systems require tight coordination between general-purpose compute and accelerator architectures. By combining the Arm AGI CPU with Rebellions’ NPUs in new high-density server configurations — we’re delivering a scalable, energy efficient platform that is optimized for AI inference workloads at scale.” – Marshall Choy, Chief Business Officer, Rebellions
SAP
“SAP’s successful deployment of SAP HANA on Arm-based AWS Graviton underscores the maturity and performance of the Arm ecosystem for enterprise workloads. The Arm AGI CPU extends that opportunity, providing scalable, efficient compute designed to support the next generation of AI-powered business solutions.” – Stefan Bäuerle, Senior Vice President, Head of HANA & Persistency, SAP
SK Telecom
“SK Telecom is expanding into large-scale, full-stack AI inference data center infrastructure, which includes Arm AGI CPU and Rebellions AI accelerator chip. By bringing together our sovereign A.X foundation model with inference-optimized AI servers, we are ready to deliver it to world while elevating our AIDC competitiveness.” – Suk-geun (SG) Chung, CTO and Head of AI CIC, SK Telecom
Forward-looking statements
This blog post contains forward-looking statements regarding Arm’s product roadmap, future performance, planned contributions and partner deployments. These statements are based on current expectations and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially. For a discussion of factors that could affect Arm’s results, please refer to Arm’s filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Performance claims are based on Arm internal estimates comparing a fully populated rack of Arm AGI CPU-based servers against comparable x86-based server configurations using industry-standard workloads. Actual results may vary based on system configuration, workload, and other factors.
All product and company names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders.
*Based on estimates
Any re-use permitted for informational and non-commercial or personal use only.